An Coimisiún um Rialáil Fóntais Commission for Regulation of Utilities




               An Coimisiún um Rialáil Fóntais
               Commission for Regulation of Utilities



              Transmission Network
              Charges for Energy
              Storage




                Minded-to Interim Decision
                Reference:     CRU/202645           Date Published:      15/04/2026

              www.cru.ie

0
An Coimisiún um Rialáil Fóntais Commission for Regulation of Utilities




CRU Strategic Plan 2025-27




1
An Coimisiún um Rialáil Fóntais Commission for Regulation of Utilities




Executive Summary
The CRU is seeking feedback on its minded-to position to issue a new interim decision to
supersede the CRU/20/115 Network Charges for Commercial Storage Units Interim Solution
issued in 2020. This Minded-to Interim Decision relates to the transmission use of system
charges (“TUoS”) paid by Energy Storage Units (“ESUs”), either standalone units or co-located
with other generation units. It does not apply to storage co-located with demand and does not
affect existing charging arrangements for Autoproducer Users.1

Battery Energy Storage Systems (“BESS”) have operated under an interim arrangement for
transmission network charging since 2020.2 The arrangement introduced by the CRU’s 2020
Interim Decision was put in place given the view that the charging arrangements at the time,
levying both demand TUoS (“D-TUoS”) and generation TUoS (“G-TUoS)”, may not have
accurately reflected the costs imposed on the network by BESS and posed a potential barrier to
entry.

The Interim Decision specified that BESS would pay D-TUoS only i.e., on the basis of their
withdrawals from the grid and Maximum Import Capacity (“MIC”). At the time, the CRU
recognised that a full review of the network tariff structure would be required to develop an
enduring charging regime for storage and intended that it would take place within the wider
Electricity Network Tariff Structure Review (2the ENTSR”) which commenced in 2020.

However, since the Interim Decision, both the level of investment in ESUs and their role on the
system have changed substantially. ESUs, which typically provided system support, are now
able to participate in the wholesale market providing flexibility by storing energy during times of
high availability for export into the system during low availability. In addition, the ENTSR was
postponed in 2022, given the necessity to divert CRU resources to manage the impact on energy
markets arising from the Russian invasion of Ukraine.

Given these circumstances, the CRU is minded-to implement a revised interim decision
specifying that ESUs should pay G-TUoS and not D-TUoS, consistent with other generation
units. For clarity, the CRU is not seeking to modify charging arrangements for Distribution Use of
Service (D”UoS”) charges.




1 The CRU will seek to conduct more comprehensive assessment and identify more enduring

solutions for charging arrangements for electricity network use of system tariffs within the scope of the
Electricity Network Tariff Structure Review (the ENTSR).
2 Whereas the CRU’s 2020 Interim Decision applied only to BESS, the CRU is minded-to broaden the

revised Interim Decision to apply to ESUs as described above.


2
An Coimisiún um Rialáil Fóntais Commission for Regulation of Utilities




The CRU’s position is that charging ESUs on the basis of G-TUoS would avoid distortions arising
from volumetric charging on ESUs, promote a level-playing field between ESUs across the
Single Electricity Market (“the SEM”) and between ESUs and other generation technologies
providing the same services, and provide locational signals for siting of ESUs. The CRU
recognises that this proposed change has the potential to increase charges for the remainder of
D-TUoS customers as set out in the impact statement below. However, given the importance of
ESUs in delivering the future energy system, the CRU expects the approach set out in this
Minded-to Interim Decision for consultation to result in overall net benefits for customers.

Given these reasons, the CRU is minded-to implement a revised interim decision reflecting
the matters set out in this paper for the 2026/27 tariff year (i.e., from October 1st, 2026). The
proposed change aims to deliver charging arrangements on an interim basis which is more
aligned with the operational nature of ESUs, including their role in providing balancing and
congestion relief.

The CRU will seek to conduct more comprehensive assessment and identify enduring solutions
for charging arrangements for network use of system tariffs within the scope of the ENTSR.
However, the CRU recognises that the ENTSR will take time to complete, and considers that the
reasons set out above require action to revise the existing Interim Decision prior to the
conclusion of the wider, multi-annual review in order to promote efficiency, the use of indigenous
renewable, sustainable or alternative forms of energy, and to protect the interests of final
electricity customers.

The CRU is seeking feedback on the minded-to interim decision as set out in this paper.




3
An Coimisiún um Rialáil Fóntais Commission for Regulation of Utilities




Public/Customer Impact Statement
The CRU expects its minded-to decision to result in the following overall net benefits for
customers:

    •   relatively lower electricity prices due to the potential for ESUs to store electricity when
        supply is abundant and releasing it during times of high demand, as well as associated
        reductions in balancing costs, curtailment and redispatch;
    •   increased integration of indigenous renewable energy, along with associated emissions
        reductions;
    •   enhanced incentives to locate storage in ways that reduce the need for network
        reinforcements, and
    •   increased investment in energy storage to provide system services.


However, the CRU’s notes that applying G-TUoS rather than D-TUoS to ESUs will, all else being
equal, result in an increase in D-TUoS charges for other demand paying customers of circa 2%.
Given TUoS constitutes approximately 8% of the standard domestic electricity bill,3 the CRU
estimates that the average impact of the CRU’s proposal is approximately 0.2% increase in the
standard domestic electricity bill.4 The CRU considers that the benefits listed above will likely
outweigh the marginal increase in D-TUoS charges.

The CRU also recognises the minded-to position will have a distributional impact on customers
paying G-TUoS. The inclusion of ESUs in the G-TUoS charging base will impact the amount paid
by different G-TUoS customers. However, unlike D-TUoS, the total average paid by customers
will not exceed the current amount which is already at the cap of €2.5/MWh set by EU Directive
838/2010.5




3 The CRU (18 October 2021), CRU’s Electricity Network Tariff Structure Review: Objectives,

Principles & Call for Evidence, CRU/21/123.
4 The estimated impact on the standard domestic electricity bill assumes that the average domestic

customer has the same demand profile and MIC as the average D-TUoS billpayer. In reality, the
estimated impact on the standard domestic electricity may be slightly higher or slightly lower,
depending on whether the demand profile of an average domestic customer leads to the customer
generally paying more or less TUoS on average.
5 Commission Regulation (EU) No 838/2010 of 23 September 2010 on laying down guidelines relating

to the inter-transmission system operator compensation mechanism and a common regulatory
approach to transmission charging, Annex Part B.


4
An Coimisiún um Rialáil Fóntais Commission for Regulation of Utilities




Table of Contents

Glossary of Terms and Abbreviations.................................................................... 6

1. Introduction ........................................................................................................ 9

    1.1.   Background ................................................................................................................... 9
    1.2.   Related Documents ..................................................................................................... 10
    1.3.   Legal and Policy Background ........................................................................................ 10
    1.4.   Structure of Paper ....................................................................................................... 11

2. Evolution of Transmission Network Charges and Payment by ESUs ......... 13

    2.1.   Summary of Transmission Use of System Charges in Ireland ......................................... 13
    2.2.   Pre-2020 Network Charges for BESS Units in Ireland ..................................................... 15
    2.3.   Post-2020 Network Charging Arrangements for BESS Units in Ireland ........................... 15
    2.4.   Network Charging Arrangements for BESS Units in Other European Countries .............. 17

3. Re-evaluating Transmission Network Charges for ESUs............................. 19

    3.1.   The Evolving Role of ESUs in the Irish Market ............................................................... 19
    3.2.   Distortions Arising from Volumetric Charging ............................................................... 20
    3.3.   A Level Playing Field for ESUs Across the SEM .............................................................. 21
    3.4.   A Level Playing Field Between ESUs and Other Generation Technologies ...................... 22
    3.5.   Locational Signals and the Siting of ESUs ...................................................................... 23
    3.6.   Charging Incentives for ESUs under MIC and MEC ........................................................ 24
    3.7.   Implications for D-TUoS Customers .............................................................................. 25

4. Minded-to Decision for Consultation ............................................................. 28

5. Responding to this Paper ............................................................................... 29

Appendix: Methodology to Estimate Customer Impact ...................................... 31




5
An Coimisiún um Rialáil Fóntais Commission for Regulation of Utilities




Glossary of Terms and Abbreviations


    Abbreviation or Term                          Definition or Meaning

    ACER                                          European Union Agency for the Cooperation of
                                                  Energy Regulators

    Act                                           Electricity Regulation Act, 1999

    AIE Regulations                               The European Communities (Access to Information
                                                  on the Environment) Regulations 2007 to 2014

    AIRAA                                         All-Island Resource Adequacy Assessment

    Autoproducer User                             A User who supplies a natural or legal person who
                                                  consumes and generates electricity in a Single
                                                  Premises or, on whose behalf another person
                                                  generates electricity in the Single Premises where
                                                  such generation is essentially used in that Single
                                                  Premises


                                                  Or


                                                  Supplies a natural or legal person who consumes and
                                                  generates electricity in a Single Premises, or on
                                                  whose behalf another person generates electricity in
                                                  the Single Premises whereby the generated
                                                  electricity is produced through a Combined Heat and
                                                  Power process under a licence by CRU

    BESS                                          Battery Energy Storage Systems

    CEP                                           Clean Energy Package

    CRU                                           Commission for Regulation of Utilities

    D-TUoS                                        Demand Transmission Use of System

    ECA                                           Economic Consulting Associates




6
An Coimisiún um Rialáil Fóntais Commission for Regulation of Utilities




    EirGrid                                       The holder of the Transmission System Operator
                                                  licence granted to it by the CRU under section 14(1)
                                                  (e) of the Act

    ENTSR                                         Electricity Network Tariff Structure Review

    ESBN                                          ESB Networks

    ESI                                           Energy Storage Ireland

    ESU                                           Energy Storage Unit as defined in the Grid Code

    EU                                            European Union

    FOI Act                                       Freedom of Information Act 2014

    G-TUoS                                        Generation Transmission Use of System

    kW                                            Kilowatt

    MEC                                           Maximum Export Capacity

    MIC                                           Maximum Import Capacity

    MW                                            Megawatt

    MWh                                           Megawatt-hour

    NEDS                                          National Energy Demand Strategy

    Network Charges                               For the use of the transmission system infrastructure
                                                  for the transportation of electricity

    PN                                            Physical Notification

    Postage Stamp Component                       A portion of G-TUoS that is intended to recover a
                                                  minimum of 70% of the total G-TUoS revenue and is
                                                  applied evenly across all generators

    Regulatory Authorities (RAs)                  The Utility Regulator (UR) in Northern Ireland and the
                                                  Commission for Regulation of Utilities (CRU) in
                                                  Ireland and the term “Regulatory Authority” shall be
                                                  construed accordingly to mean any one of them as
                                                  the context admits or requires

    RES                                           Renewable Energy Source

    SDP 2                                         Initiative 2 of the Scheduling and Dispatch
                                                  Programme



7
An Coimisiún um Rialáil Fóntais Commission for Regulation of Utilities




    SEAI                                          Sustainable Energy Authority of Ireland


    SEM                                           The Single Electricity Market, which is the wholesale
                                                  all island single electricity market


    SEMC                                          Single Electricity Market Committee


    SEMO                                          Single Electricity Market Operator

    SONI                                          The System Operator in Northern Ireland and the
                                                  holder of the Licence to Participate in the
                                                  Transmission of Electricity granted by the UR under
                                                  the Electricity (Northern Ireland) Order 1992

    System Services Charge                        For the recovery of the costs arising from the
                                                  operation and security of the transmission system

    TAO                                           Transmission Asset Owner

    TNUoS charges                                 Transmission Network Use of System charges that
                                                  recover the cost of installing and maintaining the
                                                  transmission system in England, Wales, Scotland,
                                                  and offshore

    Triad                                         The half-hour settlement period of highest demand on
                                                  the Great Britain’s electricity transmission system
                                                  between November and February (inclusive) each
                                                  year

    TSO                                           Transmission System Operator

    TUoS                                          Transmission Use of System

    UR                                            Utility Regulatory in Northern Ireland




8
An Coimisiún um Rialáil Fóntais Commission for Regulation of Utilities




1. Introduction
This paper is for the attention of all members of the public and the energy industry. It will be of
particular interest to the ESU industry, customers paying transmission network charges, and
network companies.


1.1. Background

EirGrid’s Grid Code defines ESUs as “Generation Units using storage devices to generate and
consume electricity as, or as part of, a PPM” (Power Park Module).6 Prior to 2020, ESU capacity
in Ireland totalled approximately 19.5 MW.7 ESUs connected to the transmission network paid
Transmission System Use of System charges (“TUoS”) on both energy withdrawals (Demand
TUoS, or “D-TUoS”) and injections (Generation TUoS, or “G-TUoS”) given the potential to
impose costs to the transmission network from both activities.8

Battery Energy Storage Systems (BESS) have operated under an interim arrangement for
transmission network charging since 2020. The CRU introduced an Interim Decision in 2020 with
the view that existing charging arrangements at the time, levying both demand TUoS (D-TUoS)
and generation TUoS (G-TUoS), may not have accurately reflected the costs imposed on the
network by BESS and posed a potential barrier to entry.

However, since the 2020 Interim Decision, both the anticipated investment in ESUs and their role
on the system have changed substantially, enabled by new policy and market design changes
such as Initiative 2 of the Scheduling and Dispatch Programme (“SDP 2”).9 These changes
increase the scope of potential system benefits delivered by ESUs through participation in
wholesale markets. In addition, the ENTSR was postponed in 2022, with CRU resourcing
diverted to manage the impact on energy markets arising from the Russian invasion of Ukraine.

Given these changes, and calls from industry to charge ESUs on the basis of G-TUoS in
alignment with arrangements in Northern Ireland, the CRU is reconsidering the Interim Decision
on the transmission network charges to be paid by ESUs. The CRU intends to apply the updated
Interim Decision to all ESUs which are standalone units or co-located with generation, to ensure




6 EirGrid (17 October 2025), EirGrid Grid Code Version 16, p. 417.
7 SEAI (December 2025), Energy in Ireland 2025 Report, p.70.
8 The CRU (June 2020), Network Charges for Commercial Storage Units Interim Solution

Consultation Paper, CRU/20/066, p.1. See also SEAI (December 2025), Energy in Ireland 2025
Report, Table 4.10.
9 EirGrid, SEMO & SONI (November 2025), Overview of SDP Solution for Battery Units Version 2.0.




9
An Coimisiún um Rialáil Fóntais Commission for Regulation of Utilities




consistency with other generation units. The CRU’s minded-to Interim Decision does not apply to
storage co-located with demand and does not affect existing charging arrangements for
Autoproducer Users..10


1.2. Related Documents

     •   Network Charges for Commercial Storage Units Interim Solution (CRU/20/115)


1.3. Legal and Policy Background

The CRU’s remit regarding electricity network use of system charges is primarily set out in
Sections 35 and 36 of the Electricity Regulation Act, 1999 (the Act). Here, the CRU may give
directions to the regulated electricity network companies from time to time regarding the basis for
use of system charges and approves statements of charges received further to such directions.

More generally, the CRU’s functions and duties are set out principally in Section 9 of the Act.
Here, the CRU shall carry out its statutory functions in a manner which does not discriminate
unfairly between relevant stakeholders and with regard to a range of factors which are relevant to
the matters under consideration here. For example, the CRU must have regard, inter alia, to:11

     •   the need to protect the interests of final customers and to secure that all their reasonable
         demands for electricity are satisfied;
     •   the need to promote the continuity, security and quality of supplies of electricity;
     •   the need to promote competition;
     •   the need to promote efficiency and the use of renewable, sustainable or alternative forms
         of energy;
     •   the benefits of developing demand-side participation in electricity markets, including
         through energy efficiency, demand-response, distributed generation, energy storage and
         the use of digital technologies; and
     •   the use of energy storage technologies in participating in the balancing of electricity
         demand and supply.




10 The CRU notes that Turlough Hill already pays transmission network charges on the basis of G-

TUoS. See also: EirGrid and SONI (29 August 2025), Approved 2025/2026 Generator Use of System
Charges (GTUoS).
11 Electricity Regulation Act 1999 , Section 9: Functions of Commission.




10
An Coimisiún um Rialáil Fóntais Commission for Regulation of Utilities




Section 9 also states that, without prejudice to the duties of the Minister and the CRU not to
discriminate as above, nothing in the Act shall unduly hamper ‘…investments into, in particular,
variable and flexible energy generation, energy storage and the deployment of electromobility
and new interconnectors between Member States’.12

Other governing legislation is also relevant, including the Climate Action and Low Carbon
Development Act, 2015 and applicable EU legislation. Regarding the latter, most relevant are:

     •   Article 59 of EU Directive 2019/944 states that each regulatory authority has the duty to
         fix or approve, in accordance with transparent criteria, transmission or distribution tariffs
         or their methodologies, or both;13
     •   Matters prescribed in Article 18 of EU Regulation 2019/943 (as set out in Annex A);14
         and
     •   Requirements set out in EU Regulation 838/2010 regarding inter TSO compensation
         and a common regulatory approach to transmission charging.15

Article 18 of EU Regulation 2019/943 is of particular note as it sets out requirements in relation to
network charges, both connection and use of system, including, for example, that they shall be
cost-reflective, transparent, take into account the need for network security and flexibility, shall
be applied in a non-discriminatory manner and shall not include unrelated costs supporting
unrelated policy objectives. It also states that they shall not discriminate either positively or
negatively against energy storage or aggregation and shall not create disincentives for self-
generation, self-consumption or for participation in demand response.

This minded-to decision is published in the context of the Government’s 2024 Electricity Storage
Policy Framework as referenced in the ‘accelerate flexibility’ theme within the Climate Action
Plan of the same year.16 17


1.4. Structure of Paper
The structure of the remainder of this paper is as follows:




12 Electricity Regulation Act 1999 (revised up to 31 December 2025), Section 9: Functions of

Commission, para. 4 (ab) (iii).
13 EU Directive 2019/944, Article 59, para. 1 (a).
14 EU Regulation 2019/943, Article 18.
15 EU Regulation 838/2010.
16Department of Climate, Energy and the Environment (2024) Climate Action Plan 2024. EL

Electricity, pp 33 and 34.
17 Department of Climate, Energy and the Environment (2024) Electricity Storage Policy Frameowork.

1.3.2 Electricity Storage Technology and 1.3.6. Definition


11
An Coimisiún um Rialáil Fóntais Commission for Regulation of Utilities




     •   Section 2 describes existing transmission charges in Ireland, and how these have
         historically applied for ESUs. It covers the CRU’s 2020 Interim Decision which sought to
         align with European precedent in network charging arrangements for ESUs;
     •   Section 3 describes how the role for ESUs has changed in the Irish market since the
         2020 Interim Decision, and outlines potential benefits and risks that the CRU has
         identified in re-evaluating its previous position;
     •   Section 4 outlines the CRU’s minded-to decision, which is to charge ESUs G-TUoS
         instead of D-TUoS, and describes implementation arrangements; and
     •   Section 5 outlines how stakeholders can respond to this consultation.




12
An Coimisiún um Rialáil Fóntais Commission for Regulation of Utilities




2. Evolution of Transmission Network
  Charges and Payment by ESUs
This Section provides factual background regarding transmission charging structures and rules
for the relevant charges paid by ESUs to date.


2.1. Summary of Transmission Use of System
         Charges in Ireland

In Ireland, ESUs pay transmission charges on the basis of D-TUoS levied on their energy
withdrawals and MIC.18 This is in contrast with ESUs in Northern Ireland, which pay G-TUoS on
the basis of energy injections and MEC. This Section provides an overview of the current
demand (D-TUoS) and generation (G-TUoS) charging framework in Ireland which has applied
since the tariff year 2022/23.19

TUoS charges recover (i) the costs of using the transmission system infrastructure to transport
electricity (“Network Charges”), as well as (ii) the costs arising from the operation and security of
the transmission system (“System Services Charges”). Costs to be recovered (as determined
through allowed revenues of network companies) are allocated between D-TUoS and G-TUoS.

Approximately 75% of transmission network costs and full system service costs are recovered
through D-TUoS.20 D-TUoS charges are formed of three components with both capacity and
volumetric charging:21

     •   Demand Network Capacity Charge typically levied per MW of Maximum Import
         Capacity (MIC);22




18 With the exception of Turlough Hill, which pays G-TUoS.
19 The CRU made a decision on the peak and off-peak TUoS tariff in 2022 which EirGrid has followed

since. See The CRU (28 September 2022), CRU202291, Electricity Network Tariffs 2022/23: National
Energy Security Framework Response, p.5.
20 EirGrid (15 September 2025), EirGrid Statement of Charges 2025/2026 v1.0 where System

Services Charges are only allocated to demand users, recoverable through D-TUoS. See also Utility
Regulator (19 August 2020), G-TUoS Revenue Allocation Consultation, p.4, para 1.5, and SEM-11-
078, pp.26-27.
21 EirGrid (15 September 2025), EirGrid Statement of Charges 2025/2026 v1.0: Tariff Schedule DTS-

T, p.7.
22 EirGrid can also calculate the Demand Network Capacity Charge based on a customer’s Minimum

Charging Capacity, or the highest metered consumption demand within the charging period. See:
EirGrid (15 September 2025), EirGrid Statement of Charges 2025/2026 v1.0: Tariff Schedule DTS-T,
p.7.


13
An Coimisiún um Rialáil Fóntais Commission for Regulation of Utilities




     •   Demand Network Transfer Charge levied per MWh of energy consumption within the
         charging period. Together with the Demand Network Capacity Charge, these two
         Network Charges recover the costs of using transmission system infrastructure to import
         electricity from the system; and
     •   Demand System Services Charge levied per MWh of energy consumption with time-of-
         use variation between peak (17:00 to 19:00) and off-peak hours. The System Services
         Charge recovers the costs arising from the operation and security of the transmission
         system.

The remaining share of transmission network costs are recovered through G-TUoS levied on
generators in Ireland, and generators and ESUs in Northern Ireland.23 G-TUoS charges are
formed of three components, and largely recover costs using capacity-based charges:24

     •   Generation Network Location-based Capacity Charge levied per kW of the unit’s
         MEC and includes two sub-components:25
             o   A “Postage Stamp Component” which is fixed per kW for the charging year
                 irrespective of the unit’s location in the network; and
     •   A “Locational Component” which varies per kW depending on the location of the unit’s
         connection to the transmission network, as introduced above. EirGrid sets the Locational
         Component to reflect how the costs of providing transmission vary across the network
         such that it “tends to be higher in regions which are remote from large demand centres,
         and in parts of the network which have a large number of developments built or
         planned”.26
     •   Generation System Services Charges, levied to recover costs associated with
         operational performance failures by the generator (such as power trips, short-notice
         changes in output, failure to meet reactive power or reserve requirements).




23 The All-Island G-TUoS pot comprises 25% of the transmission network costs from Ireland, 25 % of

the Northern Ireland Electricity Networks TUoS requirement, and 15% of SONI’s revenue related to
internal costs. See The Utility Regulator (27 April 2021), G-TUoS Revenue Allocation Decision Paper,
para 4.3 and 4.4.
24 EirGrid (15 September 2025), EirGrid Statement of Charges 2025/2026 v1.0: Tariff Schedule DTS-

T, p.7.
25 EirGrid (8 September 2025), Approved 2025/2026 Generator Use of System Charges (GTUoS):

Accompanying Note, pp.6-9.
26 EirGrid (8 September 2025), Approved 2025/2026 Generator Use of System Charges (GTUoS):

Accompanying Note, p.7.


14
An Coimisiún um Rialáil Fóntais Commission for Regulation of Utilities




While D-TUoS charges are set by EirGrid for Ireland, G-TUoS charges are governed by the
Single Electricity Market Committee (“the SEMC”) and are set on a SEM wide basis by the
relevant Transmission System Operators (“the TSOs”).27


2.2. Pre-2020 Network Charges for BESS Units in
         Ireland

Prior to 2020, there was only a small amount of BESS capacity connected to the SEM. In 2020,
BESS storage capacity in Ireland was 15 MWh, only 1.6% of the 943 MWh in BESS volume
connected four years later in 2024.28

The predominant role of BESS units has been to provide system services. System processes
and regulations in the SEM largely precluded BESS units from participating in energy trading to
provide flexibility in wholesale energy markets (i.e., by importing intermittent generation at times
of high availability for future export during times of low availability):

     •   BESS units were registered and modelled as “multi-fuel generator” units that did not
         reflect battery-specific technical capabilities such as charging capability, meaning TSOs
         could not track battery charge levels; and
     •   BESS units could not submit negative Physical Notifications (“PNs”) to notify TSOs of
         their intention to charge in a market period, meaning they had to adhere to pre-approved
         charging schedules that limited their ability to respond to price signals.

BESS paid both D-TUoS on energy withdrawals and G-TUoS for energy injections, as well as
paying Network Capacity Charges on both their MIC and MEC through D-TUoS and G-TUoS
charges.


2.3. Post-2020 Network Charging Arrangements for
         BESS Units in Ireland




27 Unlike the CRU which publishes the allowed revenue for each calendar year, Utility Regulator (UR)

in Northern Ireland publishes allowed revenue for each tariff year. See EirGrid & SONI (8 September
2025), Approved 2025/2026 Generator Use of System Charges (GTUoS) Accompanying Note, p.5,
see also UR (September 2025), Regulated Entitlement Values 2025-2026 Tariff Year, para 2.7.
28 SEAI (December 2025), Energy in Ireland 2025 Report, p.71.




15
An Coimisiún um Rialáil Fóntais Commission for Regulation of Utilities




In 2020 the CRU consulted on an Interim Decision for BESS TUoS charges which sought to
better align with new European regulations and remove market entry barriers.29 For example, the
EU’s 2019 Clean Energy Package (” the CEP”) explicitly requires Member States to ensure that
BESS units are “not subject to any double charging, including network charges” for stored
energy.30

In its 2020 Interim Decision, the CRU considered three alternative charging arrangements to
adopt for BESS units:31

     •   Apply D-TUoS charges only to BESS units.
     •   Apply G-TUoS charges only to BESS units.
     •   Apply charges similar to Autoproducers, at the higher of either D-TUoS or G-TUoS
         charges.

The CRU decided that, on an interim basis, BESS units should pay transmission network
charges on the basis of D-TUoS only. The reasons for the CRU’s Interim Decision were largely
based on an assessment that “incentivising a storage provider to have a higher MEC and a lower
MIC, facilitates more efficient operation of the system” because:32

     •   G-TUoS charges are based in part on a unit’s MEC. Charging based on G-TUoS
         therefore creates potential incentives for BESS to understate their MEC, reducing their
         capability to provide system services when called upon.33 Charging based on D-TUoS
         sought to “remove a potential impediment to enabling higher MECs for storage providers”
         increasing their “capability to provide more system support when called upon by the
         TSO”;
     •   Applying D-TUoS charges, which are based in-part on MIC, potentially creates a similar
         incentive for BESS to understate import capacity thereby limiting the flexibility BESS can
         provide (which require import capacity to import energy when availability is high).
         However, the CRU did not view this as an issue at the time, since BESS could “simply
         import at a lower rate over a longer period of time”; and




29 The CRU (29 September 2020), CRU/20/115 Network Charges for Commercial Storage Units

Interim Solution: Introduction, pp. 1-2.
30 EU Directive 2019/944, Article 15 (5) (b).
31 The CRU (29 September 2020), CRU/20/115 Network Charges for Commercial Storage Units

Interim Solution: Proposed Interim Solution, pp. 2-3.
32 The CRU (29 September 2020), CRU/20/115 Network Charges for Commercial Storage Units

Interim Solution: Proposed Interim Solution, pp. 2-3.
33 Section 3.6 below discusses this point further.




16
An Coimisiún um Rialáil Fóntais Commission for Regulation of Utilities




     •     In any case, the CRU considered that a higher MIC would “allow storage providers to
           import large amounts of energy over a short period of time which can increase the
           complexity of system operation”.34

The CRU made these considerations in the context of the expectation that BESS would largely
play a role in the provision of system services, whereas now the expectation is that ESUs will
also play an important role in energy arbitrage.

Since the 2020 Interim Decision, BESS units have paid transmission network charges only on
the basis of D-TUoS in Ireland.

The CRU intended that the Interim Decision would be a temporary one and subject to review under
the ENTSR, which was commenced in 2020. However, the ENTSR was postponed, with the CRU
diverting resources to manage the impact on energy markets arising from the Russian invasion of
Ukraine.


2.4. Network Charging Arrangements for BESS Units
           in Other European Countries
Transmission network charging approaches for BESS vary across European jurisdictions. In
general, countries have sought to avoid charging BESS for withdrawals and injections, by applying
only one of either demand or generator transmission charges for BESS. Many countries exempt
BESS from transmission charges altogether, sometimes as part of interim arrangements to allow
for time to analyse potential enduring solutions.

In some jurisdictions, BESS units have paid generation transmission network charges which are
generally lower than demand network charges. BESS units located in Northern Ireland pay G-
TUoS rather than D-TUoS charges.35 In Great Britain, BESS pay zonal and capacity-based
generation Transmission Network Use of System (”TNUoS”) charges.36 BESS units are only liable
for demand TNUoS charges if they import energy from the system during peak times (the “Triad”
period).




34 The CRU (24 June 2020), CRU/20/115, Network Charges for Commercial Storage Units Interim

Solution Decision Paper, p.4.
35 SONI TUoS Statement of Charge, Applicable from 1st October 2025, pp. 14-17.
36 NESO The Statement of Use of System Charges, Issue 7.1, Effective from 1 April 2025, pp. 7-11.




17
An Coimisiún um Rialáil Fóntais Commission for Regulation of Utilities




In some European jurisdictions, BESS units are exempt from transmission charges altogether,
sometimes as interim arrangements ahead of an enduring solution. For example, In Italy37,
Lithuania38, Spain39, and Portugal, BESS units are eligible for revenue via wholesale and
system services markets, but are exempt from transmission use of system charges.40 Belgium
and Germany have previously applied derogations from transmission network charging.41 In
Poland and Slovakia, BESS are not exempt from transmission charges, but do receive
favourable terms compared to other transmission-connected demand and generation units.42 In
France, from August 2026 BESS will be able to opt in to a locational tariff component that
rewards charging/discharging in line with system needs.43

In summary, the approach to transmission network charging for BESS remains varied across
European jurisdictions. As set out above, many jurisdictions have introduced either interim
arrangements and/or derogations on network charges for storage in order to promote investment
while a more enduring decision is analysed.

The ACER Report on Electricity Network Tariff Methodologies in Europe offers a set of
recommendations to ensure non-discrimination by network users, including accounting for both
injections and withdrawals, as well as ensuring cost-reflectivity and efficient price signals by
moving away from flat energy-based charges and considering locational signals when needed.44

The CRU’s re-evaluation of its Interim Decision seeks to follow a similar approach, ensuring the
approach taken to network charging does not result in an undue barrier to investment, while
allowing for more time to carry out comprehensive assessment for a more enduring solution.




37 In Italy, the TSO Terna provides capacity payments to BESS, which can also earn revenue for

system services and through participation in ex ante energy markets.
38 In Lithuania, BESS imports and withdraws electricity directly from the energy grid, including to

provide system services.
39 In Spain and Portugal (collectively, the Iberian Grid), BESS units are eligible for participation in both

ancillary services and wholesale energy markets. Spain has also approved plans to procure
generation (including BESS) through a capacity market.
40 ACER (26 March 2025), Electricity network tariffs methodologies in Europe: Annex 1, Table 30.
41 In Germany, BNetzA is considering implementing new network charges for BESS with capacity and

volumetric (on net imports only) payments, which would adjust dynamically to better align
charging/discharging time and location with system requirements. See: BNetzA (4 March 2026),
Dynamic network tariff component: points of orientation in the AgNes determination proceedings.
42 ACER (26 March 2025), Electricity network tariffs methodologies in Europe: Annex 1, Table 30.
43 CRE (13 March 2025), CRE Decision No. 2025-77.
44 ACER (26 March 2025), Electricity network tariffs methodologies in Europe, p.18.




18
An Coimisiún um Rialáil Fóntais Commission for Regulation of Utilities




3. Re-evaluating Transmission Network
  Charges for ESUs
The CRU is re-evaluating its 2020 Interim Decision regarding transmission network charges for
ESUs. In its re-evaluation, the CRU has considered a request from the ESI and other industry
participants to G-TUoS instead of D-TUoS charges for ESUs:

     •   In a letter to the CRU in September 2025, ESI advocated for the CRU to direct TSOs to
         apply G-TUoS instead of D-TUoS tariffs for ESUs.45 ESI argued that in Northern Ireland,
         storage units only pay the G-TUoS charges, which “creates an uneven playing field and
         disadvantages storage units in RoI”.46 ESI also cited evidence from a study that it
         commissioned from ECA, which estimated benefits of removing D-TUoS charges,
         including a 30% increase in storage utilisation resulting in a net saving to customers of
         €37 million per annum (including reduced constraint costs, wholesale energy costs, and
         carbon costs);47 and
     •   Statkraft supported ESI in an October 2025 letter to the CRU which also advocated a
         move to G-TUoS in place of the current D-TUoS charges. Statkraft highlighted that D-
         TUoS charges create a “significant barrier to investment and operation” of storage
         assets, and that G-TUoS charges “better reflect the role and contribution of storage to the
         electricity system”.48

This Section sets out the key reasons and considerations that lead to the CRU’s minded-to
position.


3.1. The Evolving Role of ESUs in the Irish Market

Since 2020, the size of the ESU market in Ireland has grown to meet flexibility requirements in a
grid that is becoming increasingly reliant on variable generation. The uptake of additional, longer-
duration storage capacity increased the role for storage units in providing system support. In the
2024 National Energy Demand Strategy (NEDS), the CRU set out a target of delivering 20% to




45 ESI (23 September 2025), Network Charges for Energy Storage (via Email).
46 ESI (23 September 2025), Network Charges for Energy Storage (via Email), p.3.
47 ECA (21 March 2025), Network charges for energy storage, last accessed 31 March 2026, link:

https://www.energystorageireland.com/wp-content/uploads/2025/03/1070_Network-charges-for-
energy-storage_210325.pdf.
48 Statkraft (21 October 2025), Network Charges for Energy Storage (via Email).




19
An Coimisiún um Rialáil Fóntais Commission for Regulation of Utilities




30% of demand-side flexibility by 2030 and expects that ESUs will be one of the biggest
providers of that flexibility within that timeframe.49

ESUs are already contributing additional flexibility and support services across the SEM
compared to 2020. Changes to system processes and regulations, particularly via SDP 2, have
increased ESUs’ ability to provide energy flexibility by participating in ex ante energy markets:50

     •   registering BESS units as generators with a “Battery Storage” fuel type which allows for
         additional “battery-specific” characteristics (such as a minimum and maximum storage
         quantity);
     •   allowing BESS units to submit negative PNs (for charging) as well as positive PNs (for
         discharging) to notify TSOs of their intended output for each trading period, and
     •   enabling TSOs to schedule BESS units in indicative operating schedules.

The CRU considers that continued investment in ESU capacity is necessary to help facilitate the
meeting of the Government’s 80% Renewable Energy Source (RES) target by 2030.
Consideration of the appropriate degree of alignment between price signals for storage
investment and dispatch with system needs arises in this context. It is therefore essential that
price signals for storage investment and dispatch align with system needs.

Given the changes highlighted above, the CRU considers that the 2020 Interim Decision may no
longer be appropriate in the context of the role of storage in the market today.


3.2. Distortions Arising from Volumetric Charging

SDP 2 introduced new system processes and regulations to increase ESUs’ ability to participate
in wholesale energy markets. Price signals in wholesale markets incentivise ESUs to provide
system flexibility by purchasing low-cost energy during times of high availability and exporting
during times of low availability. ESUs earn arbitrage revenue on price differences in wholesale
markets and simultaneously provide system benefits such as lower curtailment and reduced
reliance on carbon intensive thermal generators.

Unlike G-TUoS charges, D-TUoS charges contain volumetric costs on each MWh of energy
withdrawn from the grid. Demand Network Transfer Charges and System Services Charges




49 The CRU (25 July 2024), CRU202467, National Energy Demand Strategy Decision Paper Decision

Paper, p.3 & 31.
50 SEM-O (20 December 2024), Scheduling and Dispatch Programme: Overview of SDP Solution for

Battery Units.


20
An Coimisiún um Rialáil Fóntais Commission for Regulation of Utilities




collectively impose an additional charge per MWh cost on imports for ESUs (between €30.56 –
€33.21 for the 2025/2026 charging period, depending on time of use).51

Charging ESUs on a volumetric basis translates into a minimum price differential in the
wholesale electricity market required for ESUs to earn arbitrage revenue while generating system
benefits by shifting generation from times of low to high marginal cost. That is not necessarily a
problem if the volumetric charges reflect the costs that energy consumption from the network
tends to impose. But that is considered unlikely to be true for D-TUoS volumetric charges given
that they recover c. 75% of total D-TUoS revenue, and the majority of transmission network costs
is typically thought to be driven by accommodating peak demand.52 The CRU will investigate this
further under the ENTSR.

Therefore, D-TUoS volumetric charges can create a distortion for ESUs that reduces their ability
to respond to market price signals and deliver system benefits.

Applying G-TUoS instead of D-TUoS removes these additional costs for ESUs to provide
flexibility by importing and exporting energy in wholesale markets.

The CRU notes that it is necessary to consider cost-reflectivity of network use of system charges
generally, including for ESUs, and will consider this issue as part of the wider, multi-annual
ENTSR.


3.3. A Level Playing Field for ESUs Across the SEM

Ireland and Northern Ireland share a single electricity market with a common energy market
price. Demand and generation units (including ESUs) connected to the SEM can freely transfer
energy across the network (subject to transmission constraints) and participate in the same
system service markets.

The basis for the application of network use of system charges for ESUs vary across the two
jurisdictions. ESUs in Northern Ireland pay G-TUoS only, while ESUs in Ireland pay D-TUoS,53
creating two distortions in signals within the market:




51 EirGrid (15 September 2025), EirGrid Statement of Charges 2025/2026 v1.0: Tariff Schedule DTS-

T, p.7.
52 ACER (26 March 2025), Electricity network tariffs methodologies in Europe, p. 8.
53 Unlike other ESUs, Turlough Hill, the sole pumped hydro unit in Ireland, already pays G-TUoS.

Source: EirGrid and SONI (29 August 2025), Approved 2025/2026 Generator Use of System Charges
(GTUoS).


21
An Coimisiún um Rialáil Fóntais Commission for Regulation of Utilities




     •   In charge level, since the value of D-TUoS charges in both jurisdictions are typically
         higher than G-TUoS charges; and
     •   In charge type, which creates different signals within the same market by, for instance,
         imposing a volumetric charge on electricity imports in Ireland only.

Applying G-TUoS rather than D-TUoS in Ireland seeks to mitigate these two distortions by more
closely aligning the basis for the application of network charges for ESUs between the two
jurisdictions, creating a more level playing field for future investment. This aligns with the original
purpose of the locational component of G-TUoS which was “to introduce harmonised all-island
Generator TUoS tariffs to provide participants in the SEM with a competitive level playing field”.54


3.4. A Level Playing Field Between ESUs and Other
         Generation Technologies

As set out in Section Error! Reference source not found. above, charging D-TUoS to ESUs in
Ireland creates an unlevel playing field between ESUs across the SEM, and distorts decisions to
invest in ESUs across different locations in the same market.

For similar reasons, charging ESUs on the basis of D-TUoS also creates an unlevel playing field
relative to other forms of generation in the SEM to provide similar services to the market. While
generation pays G-TUoS, storage pays D-TUoS which is both generally higher as a level of a
charge and levied on different usage behaviours (e.g., a volumetric component). Irrespective of
the cost reflectivity of either of the charges, the difference in charging basis creates distortions in
the competition between ESUs and generation to provide the same services to the market (e.g.,
wholesale energy and system services).

Applying G-TUoS rather than D-TUoS charges to ESUs seeks to mitigate this distortion by more
closely aligning networks charges for ESUs and other generation technologies, creating a more
level playing field for future investment.




54 EirGrid & SONI (11 April 2011), SME-11-018, Locational Signals Project: All-Island Generator

TUoS, p.3.


22
An Coimisiún um Rialáil Fóntais Commission for Regulation of Utilities




3.5. Locational Signals and the Siting of ESUs

Prospective investors currently face limited locational signals to incentivise optimal siting of future
storage assets:

     •   D-TUoS tariffs do not vary according to a unit’s location in the network;
     •   Connection charges for generators (which ESUs are liable to pay) are typically “shallow”,
         meaning they are liable for the direct cost of connecting to the nearest node, but not for
         additional transmission reinforcement deeper into the network;55 and
     •   There is a “single price” for energy in the SEM with no variation to reflect regional market
         dynamics.

Unlike D-TUoS, G-TUoS charges do contain a Locational Component which varies according to
the location of a unit’s connection to the network (for 2025/2026, the Locational Component was
between €3.24 and €11.77 per kW).56 EirGrid sets the Locational Component using the
regulatory approved G-TUoS methodology which “has been designed to link system usage with
the transmission investment costs for different parts of the network” meaning “each Generator’s
TUoS charge should then be reflective of transmission investment costs linked to its own use of
the system”.57

The price signals provided by variation in G-TUoS charges across locations of the network are
designed to incentivise more efficient siting decisions by generators and ESUs, by reflecting the
network costs associated with accommodating injections at those network locations. Generally,
for generation sources, locations that are more remote from major demand centres, or where
there is already significant generation development tend to face higher charges to reflect that
they tend to drive greater network costs to enable the flow of their in-merit energy to meet
demand.

Therefore, lower network charges closer to major demand centres may incentivise siting of ESUs
in those locations and drive system cost savings. ESUs can reduce network reinforcement




55 EirGrid & ESB Networks (June 2020), Joint TSO/DSO Group Processing Approach Charging and

Rebating Principles, pp. 5-6. See also https://www.eirgrid.ie/industry/customer-
information/connection-charges-and-security.
56 EirGrid (8 September 2025), Approved 2025/2026 Generator Use of System Charges (GTUoS):

Accompanying Note, pp. 9.
57 EirGrid (8 September 2025), Approved 2025/2026 Generator Use of System Charges (GTUoS):

Accompanying Note, p.6.


23
An Coimisiún um Rialáil Fóntais Commission for Regulation of Utilities




associated with serving demand in those locations by discharging at times of peak demand and
providing additional adequacy.

On the other hand, locational signals provided by G-TUoS may not always be appropriate for
ESUs relative to other generation types. ESUs located further away from demand centres but
near other generation sources may face higher locational charges to reflect that conventional
generation tends to increase network costs in such areas to enable the flow of energy to major
demand centres. However, ESUs in those locations can help to reduce those network costs by
absorbing surplus generation, reducing curtailment, and relieving network constraints.

The CRU is aware of the above matters which highlight the need to carry out comprehensive
assessment to design a more enduring solution for network charging arrangements under the
wider ENTSR. However, in the CRU’s current view, moving to G-TUoS on an interim basis in
advance of the wider ENTSR is more conceptually aligned with the role of ESUs than D-TUoS,
which continues to classify ESU demand as if it were adding to system load rather than
balancing and providing congestion relief.


3.6. Charging Incentives for ESUs under MIC and MEC

The changing roles of ESUs, and particularly BESS, also potentially impact the incentives
provided by levying network tariffs on the basis of MIC under current arrangements compared to
MEC under the CRU’s minded-to position.

At the time of its Interim Decision, the CRU considered that ESUs would largely play a role in the
provision of system services, whereas now the expectation is that ESUs will also play an
important role in energy arbitrage.

Charging BESS on the basis of D-TUoS incentivised a lower MIC and did not provide incentives
for BESS to reduce MEC. A BESS unit with higher MEC can provide more system support when
called upon by the TSO (through MEC), whereas a low MIC could reduce the complexity of
system operation to accommodate BESS withdrawals. At the time, the CRU considered that
BESS could “simply import at a lower rate over a longer period of time”.

However, the role of ESUs and particularly of BESS in the Irish market has changed since the
previous Interim Decision, driven by the SDP 2 and the expanding scope for ESUs to participate
in the wholesale energy market. Now, the benefits of having higher MICs to respond to price
signals faster increases. The CRU also notes that in order to reduce curtailment in short windows
of high system availability and to support the NEDS, ESUs need to have higher MICs to import
excess energy in a shorter period of time. As ESI states in June 2025:



24
An Coimisiún um Rialáil Fóntais Commission for Regulation of Utilities




“The ability to fully charge and discharge becomes more commercially and operationally critical,
making symmetric MIC and MEC not only standard, but essential…based on Energy Storage
Ireland’s most recent pipeline survey, all member projects currently in development are seeking
symmetric import and export capabilities (MIC = MEC)”.58

The CRU therefore recognises that the changing role of ESUs means its prior reasoning over the
incentives provided to ESUs to reduce MIC may no longer be appropriate.




3.7. Implications for D-TUoS Customers

Given the importance of ESUs in enabling the future energy system, the CRU expects its
minded-to decision to result in overall net benefits for customers. However, the CRU recognises
that its minded-to position impacts the amount paid in transmission network charges by other D-
TUoS customers and producers paying G-TUoS. The CRU sets out below a high-level estimate
of this impact.

For the 2025/26 tariff year, the allowed revenues for EirGrid as the Transmission System
Operator (TSO) and ESB Networks (ESBN) as the Transmission Asset Owner (TAO) for the
electricity transmission network are c. €1,396m.59 Of these allowed revenues, the TSO and TAO
will recover c. €1,278m through D-TUoS charges (including system services charges).60

The CRU’s proposal to apply G-TUoS instead of D-TUoS to ESUs will, all else being equal,
increase D-TUoS charges for other demand paying customers. The CRU adopts a conservative
approach to estimate the impact on D-TUoS customers by assuming that all the revenue
currently paid by ESUs under D-TUoS is now recovered from the remaining D-TUoS customers.
In reality, ESUs make some offsetting contribution to the revenue requirement through payments
of G-TUoS up to the cap of €2.5/MWh set by EU Directive 838/2010, given they expand the total
G-TUoS charging base.




58
   Energy Storage Ireland (18 June 2025), Response to All-Island Resource Adequacy Assessment
2026-2035 Methodology and Inputs & Assumptions Consultation, p.3.
59 The CRU (26 August 2025), Electricity Transmission Network Allowed Revenues for 2026 And

Demand Transmission Use of System (D-TUoS) Tariffs 2025/26 (CRU2025119), p. 1.
60 The remainder of the allowed revenues (c. €118m) is recovered through G-TUoS. See: EirGrid and

SONI (8 September 2025), Approved 2025/2026 Generator Use of System Charges (GTUoS),
Accompanying Note, p. 5.


25
An Coimisiún um Rialáil Fóntais Commission for Regulation of Utilities




The CRU estimates that ESUs currently contribute c. 2% of total D-TUoS payments in Ireland.61
The CRU estimates that charging ESUs G-TUoS instead of D-TUoS will mean remaining
demand customers will need to contribute an additional c. €24.0m - €26.4m (or c. 2% in
aggregate) through their D-TUoS payments.

TUoS constitutes approximately 8% of the standard domestic electricity bill.62 Therefore, the
CRU estimates that the average impact of the CRU’s proposal is a c. 0.2% increase in the
standard domestic electricity bill (i.e., c. 2% increase in D-TUoS multiplied by c. 8% share of total
electricity bill).63

The CRU estimates the average impact on each component of D-TUoS as follows:64

     •   Demand Network Capacity Charge: increase of c. 5.28%;
     •   Demand Network Transfer Charge: increase of c. 0.09% - 0.14%; and
     •   Demand System Services Charge: increase of c. 1.24% - 2.02%.

The CRU explains the estimation procedure in more detail in the Appendix.

While the CRU recognises the impact on D-TUoS customer bills, it considers that the wider
system benefits of the decision will likely outweigh the estimated increase set out above. As
described above:

     •   Electricity storage systems can help lower overall energy costs by storing electricity when
         supply is abundant and releasing it during times of higher demand, thereby easing
         pressure on the system during peak periods (see Section 3.2).
     •   ESUs can support more efficient locational and operational decisions by encouraging
         storage to connect and operate in areas where it provides the greatest value to the




61
   The CRU (26 August 2025), Electricity Transmission Network Allowed Revenues for 2026 And
Demand Transmission Use of System (D-TUoS) Tariffs 2025/26 (CRU2025119), p. 1.
62 The CRU (18 October 2021), CRU’s Electricity Network Tariff Structure Review: Objectives,

Principles & Call for Evidence, CRU/21/123.
63 The estimated impact on the standard domestic electricity bill assumes that the average domestic

customer has the same demand profile and MIC as the average D-TUoS billpayer. In reality, the
estimated impact on the standard domestic electricity may be slightly higher or slightly lower,
depending on whether the demand profile of an average domestic customer leads to the customer
generally paying more or less TUoS on average.
64 The CRU’s estimates rely on assumptions on the charging profile of ESUs which are currently

connected to EirGrid’s transmission network. The CRU estimates total D-TUoS payments by these
ESUs under the charges for the 2025/26 tariff year, i.e., the Demand Network Capacity Charge, the
Demand Network Transfer Charge, and the Demand System Services Charge. The CRU assumes
that the share of total D-TUoS payments recovered through each charge remains constant. The CRU
explains its estimation procedure in more detail in the Appendix.


26
An Coimisiún um Rialáil Fóntais Commission for Regulation of Utilities




         network, including where it can help alleviate constraints and reduce congestion (see
         Section 3.5).
     •   Greater investment in ESU capacity can strengthen system security and flexibility by
         providing fast-response services such as frequency support, reserve, balancing and
         other ancillary services (see Section 3.1). This can reduce reliance on more carbon-
         intensive or higher-cost conventional generation for system support purposes.

Over time, these benefits should contribute to a more efficient use of network infrastructure,
improved integration of renewable generation and a more resilient electricity system overall. On
that basis, while there may be a limited increase in certain customer charges in the short term,
the CRU considers that the broader and longer-term benefits of energy storage deployment are
likely to outweigh these impacts. The CRU therefore expects a net positive impact for electricity
consumers if its minded-to interim decision is implemented.

The CRU also recognises its proposal will have a small, and mainly distributional impact on
producers paying G-TUoS. The amount paid by different G-TUoS payers (net of any repayments
over the cap of €2.5/MWh set by EU Directive 838/2010) will vary given that the charging base
will vary with the inclusion of ESUs. Whether aggregate revenue from other producers (excluding
ESUs) varies due to the CRU’s proposed decision depends on whether ESUs contribute to G-
TUoS at, or above, €2.5/MWh.




27
An Coimisiún um Rialáil Fóntais Commission for Regulation of Utilities




4. Minded-to Decision for Consultation
Considering the context and reasons above, the CRU is minded-to implement a revised
Interim Decision specifying that standalone ESUs, or those co-located with other forms of
generation, should pay G-TUoS, consistent with other generation units. For clarity, the revised
Interim Decision will not apply to storage co-located with demand, does not affect existing
charging arrangements for Autoproducer Users and does not seek to revise arrangements for
Distribution Use of Service (DUoS) charges.

The CRU considers that there is a need to revise the current interim network charging
arrangements for ESUs at this time given the matters set out earlier in this paper. The CRU
considers that application to standalone ESUs or those co-located with generation but not to
ESUs co-located with demand – including Autoproducer Users - is a pragmatic approach that
should facilitate implementation in advance of the wider, multi-annual ENTSR. To seek to carry
out a wider ranging review at this time would impact on timelines for decision making,
implementation and for the potential benefits of the interim arrangement set out in this paper to
accrue to electricity customers.

The CRU is minded-to apply network charges to ESUs on the same basis as for other
generation units. The CRU will seek to conduct more comprehensive assessment and identify
more enduring solutions for charging arrangements for network tariffs within the scope of the
ENTSR. However, the CRU recognises that the ENTSR will take time to complete, and considers
that the reasons set out above require action to revise the existing Interim Decision prior to the
conclusion of the wider, multi-annual review in order to promote efficiency, the use of indigenous
renewable, sustainable or alternative forms of energy, and protect the interests of customers in
the market.

Given these reasons, the CRU is minded-to implement its revised Interim Decision for the
2026/2027 tariff year (i.e., publication of charges from 1 September 2026 to apply from 1
October 2026). The CRU is working with EirGrid to ensure that the CRU’s decision further to this
consultation process can be implemented as above. The CRU recognises that the annual
network tariff calculation process is underway and that arrangements will have to be put in place
to ensure that the CRU’s decision on this matter is appropriately reflected for the upcoming tariff
year. The CRU acknowledges EirGrid’s co-operation on this matter.

The proposed change will remain an Interim Decision and aims to deliver charging arrangements
which are more aligned with the operational nature of ESUs including their role in providing
balancing and congestion relief.




28
An Coimisiún um Rialáil Fóntais Commission for Regulation of Utilities




5. Responding to this Paper
The CRU is seeking feedback on its minded-to Interim Decision. Responses to this consultation
should be submitted through the dedicated CRU consultation by close of business on 13 May
2026.

Specifically, the CRU requests feedback on the following questions:

     1. Do you agree with the CRU’s minded-to position to remove D-TUoS for ESUs and charge
         on the basis of G-TUoS and not D-TUoS, consistent with other generation units?

     2. Do you agree with the reasons stated for the position, which are that replacing D-TUoS
         charges for ESUs with G-TUoS:

     •   provides a locational siting signal for ESUs;
     •   promotes a level playfield across ESUs located across the SEM;
     •   promotes a level playing field between ESUs and generators within the SEM; and
     •   promotes ESUs’ ability to provide system benefits in wholesale markets by removing the
         distortions of volumetric charging?

     3. Do you have any feedback regarding the CRU’s proposed implementation of its
         decision?

     4. Should the CRU be considering other factors in evaluating the effectiveness of this
         interim decision and in future work regarding a more enduring decision?

It is not mandatory to answer all the questions in this consultation. Unless marked confidential, all
responses from companies or organisations will be published in full on the CRU’s website.
Respondents may request that their response is kept confidential. The CRU shall respect this
request, subject to any obligations to disclose information. Respondents who wish to have their
responses remain confidential should clearly state this in their response and include the reasons
for confidentiality. All respondents may be listed in a summary of responses, even those who
request that elements of their response should be treated as confidential. Responses from
identifiable members of the public will be anonymised prior to publication on the CRU website
unless the respondent explicitly requests their personal details to be published.

Respondents should note that all material held by the CRU, including confidential consultation
submissions, are subject to the Freedom of Information Act 2014 (‘FOI Act’) and the European
Communities (Access to Information on the Environment) Regulations 2007 to 2014 (‘AIE
Regulations’). Therefore, such submissions may potentially be released in response to requests



29
An Coimisiún um Rialáil Fóntais Commission for Regulation of Utilities




made under the FOI Act and the AIE Regulations. The CRU privacy notice sets out how we
protect the privacy rights of individuals here.65

The CRU will consider responses by stakeholders submitted by close of business on 13 May
2026.

Pending evaluation of consultation responses, the proposed interim decision will enable the
implementation of new transmission network charging arrangements at the start of Tariff year
2026/2027.

Following implementation of the interim decision, the CRU will further consider consultation
responses, insights from implementation of the interim decision and experiences from other
jurisdictions in the analysis and development of an enduring tariff arrangement.




65 The CRU Privacy Notice, see https://www.cru.ie/privacy-notice/.




30
An Coimisiún um Rialáil Fóntais Commission for Regulation of Utilities




Appendix: Methodology to Estimate
Customer Impact
The CRU’s minded-to position impacts the amount paid in transmission network charges by other
D-TUoS and G-TUoS customers. The CRU sets out below a high-level estimate of this impact.
As explained in Section 3.7, the estimated impact may be an over-estimate because it does not
account for the contribution of ESUs to the G-TUoS revenue requirement up to the cap of
€2.5/MWh set by EU Directive 838/2010.

Broadly, the approach seeks to estimate the existing D-TUoS revenue from ESUs by making an
assumption over ESU capacity and energy withdrawals. Then it estimates the increase in D-
TUoS charges required to recover that additional revenue from remaining D-TUoS customers.

The CRU uses two approaches to estimate ESU capacity and energy withdrawals:

     •   An approach using ESU energy consumption (MWh) data from EirGrid (“the EirGrid
         method”); and
     •   A bottom-up consumption per MW based on the average ESU cycle estimations for
         ESUs of different durations from the ECA study (“the ECA method”).66

The EirGrid method uses EirGrid’s data on annual energy consumption (MWh) from ESUs ,
which is c. 130 GWh in 2025. Under the ECA method, the CRU estimates that, based on ESU
capacity connected to EirGrid’s transmission grid (834 MW in 2025) and average ESU cycles per
day from the ECA study, annual energy consumption from ESUs is c. 200 GWh in 2025.

Using both approaches, the CRU estimates that D-TUoS revenue from ESS constitutes
approximately 2% of all allowed revenue allocated to D-TUoS (including through the system
services charge). This means the overall D-TUoS allocated to the remainder of the demand
charging base increases by around 2%.

Given TUoS constitutes approximately 8% of the standard domestic electricity bill,67 the CRU
estimates that the average impact of the CRU’s proposal is a c. 0.2% increase in the standard
domestic electricity bill.




66 ECA (21 March 2025), Network charges for energy storage, Figure 6.
67 The CRU (18 October 2011), CRU’s Electricity Network Tariff Structure Review: Objectives,

Principles & Call for Evidence, CRU/21/123.


31
An Coimisiún um Rialáil Fóntais Commission for Regulation of Utilities




The CRU calculates the average increase for each D-TUoS component (i.e., the Capacity
Charge, the Network Transfer Charge, and the System Services Charge) to recover the same
revenue:

     •   The Capacity Charge allocated to the remainder of the demand charging base increases
         by c. 5% under both methods;
     •   The Network Transfer Charge allocated to the remainder of the demand charging base
         increases by less than 0.2% under both methods; and
     •   The System Services Charge allocated to the remainder of the demand charging base
         increases by c. 1% under the EirGrid method, and c. 2% under the ECA method.68

As a sensitivity, the CRU also estimated the impact of its minded-to position under the
assumption that ESU capacity in Ireland (excluding pumped storage) increases to c. 1,510 MW
by 2030, as per the TSOs’ All-Island Resource Adequacy Assessment 2026-2035 (AIRAA).69
The CRU assumes that all other factors remain constant, in particular the allowed revenue to be
recovered under D-TUoS, total demand from all other demand customers, and the proportion of
D-TUoS recovered from the different components. For this sensitivity, the CRU estimates that:

     •   Total D-TUoS recovered from the remaining demand customers increases by c. 3.5%
         under the EirGrid method and c. 3.9% under the ECA method. This implies an average
         increase of the standard domestic electricity bill of c. 0.3%.
     •   The Capacity Charge allocated to the remainder of the demand charging base increases
         by c. 10% under both methods.
     •   The Network Transfer Charge allocated to the remainder of the demand charging base
         increases by c. 0.2% under the EirGrid method and c. 0.3% under the ECA method.
     •   The System Services charge allocated to the remainder of the demand charging base
         increased by c. 2% under the EirGrid method and c. 4% under the ECA method.

For this sensitivity, the CRU estimates that annual consumption from ESUs in 2030 is c. 230
GWh under the EirGrid method, and c. 370 GWh under the ECA method.

The CRU makes the following assumptions to estimate the average impact of the minded-to
interim decision on demand customers:




68 The CRU notes that average impacts estimated under the ECA method are in general higher than

under the EirGrid method. This is because under the ECA method, the estimated annual energy
consumption (MWh) of ESUs in Ireland is higher than under the EirGrid method.
69 EirGrid and SONI (2025), All-Island Resource Adequacy Assessment 2026-2035, p 99.




32
An Coimisiún um Rialáil Fóntais Commission for Regulation of Utilities




     •   Under both methods, to obtain the total ESU capacity, the CRU considers the registered
         capacity of transmission-connected ESUs in Ireland, i.e., c. 834 MW. This capacity
         excludes Turlough Hill which already pays TUoS on the basis of G-TUoS. By omitting
         distribution-connected ESUs, the CRU notes these estimates carry the risk of
         underestimating the tariff impact. However, this impact is likely to be small as the share
         of ESUs connected directly to the distribution network is relatively small in terms of the
         total MW capacity.
     •   Under both methods, the CRU assumes that ESUs charge (i.e., consumes energy)
         during the off-peak ToU band, which means the higher System Services Charge rate for
         the peak window does not apply.
     •   Under both methods, the CRU assumes zero MWh unauthorised usage by ESUs.
     •   Under the EirGrid method, the CRU assumes that annual energy consumption from
         ESUs per unit of capacity stays constant. To estimate annual energy consumption from
         ESUs in 2030, the CRU first divides total ESU capacity (in MW) by annual consumption
         from ESUs in 2025 (in MWh), to calculate energy consumption per unit of capacity. The
         CRU then multiplies ESU capacity for 2030 by the ratio from the first step to arrive at the
         estimate of annual energy consumption from ESUs in 2030.
     •   Under both methods, to estimate the impact on the individual components of D-TUoS,
         the CRU first calculates ESU payments of each D-TUoS component (i.e., the Demand
         Network Capacity Charge, the Demand Network Transfer Charge, and the Demand
         System Services Charge). The CRU assumes that the proportion of D-TUoS recovered
         from each component remains constant. The CRU then estimates the average increase
         in each charging component that the remaining demand customers face. In other words,
         the CRU assumes that the revenue recovered from ESUs e.g., through the Demand
         System Services Charge will be recovered by the remaining demand customers through
         the Demand System Services Charge, not another component of D-TUoS.




33
