Marginal curtailment of wind and solar PV:
transmission constraints, pricing and access
regimes for efficient investment

David Newbery and Darryl Biggar1
EPRG Working Paper                   2401
Cambridge Working Paper in Economics                       2405

Abstract
As Variable Renewable Energy (VRE) penetration increases in poorly networked areas with
suitable VRE resources, transmission constraints will increasingly force VRE curtailment.
Under most European market access and pricing arrangements, location and operation
decisions are based on average curtailment rates. As the marginal contribution of the last
MW of VRE is 3+ times average curtailment, there is a risk of inefficient location and
operation. This article compares different pricing and access regimes (including nodal pricing
that gives efficient transmission scarcity signals) to compare their impact on the incentives
for VRE merchant or market driven entry.

Keywords Transmission constraints, access regimes, variable renewable electricity,
marginal curtailment, nodal pricing

JEL Classification H23; L94; Q28; Q42; Q48




Contact         David Newbery, dmgn@cam.ac.uk
                Energy Policy Research Group,
                Faculty of Economics,
                University of Cambridge,
                Sidgwick Ave., Cambridge,
                CB3 9DD, UK




1
    Monash University and CEPA Australia
                              www.eprg.group.cam.ac.uk
          Marginal curtailment of wind and solar PV: transmission
    constraints, pricing and access regimes for eﬃcient investment∗

                                   David M Newbery†and Darryl Biggar‡
                                Cambridge Energy Policy Research Group

                                                February 5, 2024



                                                     Abstract

              As Variable Renewable Energy (VRE) penetration increases in poorly networked areas
          with suitable VRE resources, transmission constraints will increasingly force VRE curtail-
          ment. Under most European market access and pricing arrangements, location and opera-
          tion decisions are based on average curtailment rates. As the marginal contribution of the
          last MW of VRE is 3+ times average curtailment, there is a risk of ineﬃcient location and
          operation. This article compares diﬀerent pricing and access regimes (including nodal pricing
          that gives eﬃcient transmission scarcity signals) to compare their impact on the incentives
          for VRE merchant or market driven entry.

          Keywords: Transmission constraints, access regimes, variable renewable electricity, mar-
          ginal curtailment, nodal pricing
          JEL Classification H23; L94; Q28; Q42; Q48



1        Introduction

At the Paris 2015 UN Conference of the Parties COP21 196 signatories announced Nationally
Determined Contributions (NDCs) setting out their approach to reducing emissions.1 At the
most recent COP28 in 2023 more than 115 countries promised to triple renewable energy ca-
pacity by 2030.2 Both ambitions will require a massive increase in the proportion of electricity
    ∗
        I am grateful to Par Holmberg and Tom Walker for comments on earlier versions of this paper. Although the
author is with Biggar associated with CEPA, the views expressed here are entirely their own.
    †
        Faculty of Economics, Sidgwick Ave, Cambridge, CB3 9DE, UK, ph:               +44 1223 335248; email:
dmgn@cam.ac.uk.
    ‡
        Monash University and CEPA Australia
    1
        https://unfccc.int/process-and-meetings/the-paris-agreement
    2
        https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_23_6053


                                                          1
generated by Variable Renewable Electricity (VRE, wind and solar PV).3 VRE has two impor-
tant distinguishing characteristics. First, its avoidable costs are low (zero for PV, very low for
wind). Second, VRE has a high ratio of peak:average output, 3-4:1 for wind, 4-10:1 for PV,
depending on the resource quality. If VRE is to contribute a high share of annual output, peak
generation will inevitably exceed demand (including for storage and export) for a significant
fraction of the year and real-time wholesale prices could collapse in such periods (Frew et al.,
2019, 2021; O’Shaughnessy et al., 2020; Song et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2021). Excess VRE
supply will need to be curtailed, by which we mean that it will be required to produce less than
its ability to produce at current levels of wind/sunshine. This concept is to be contrasted with
making the economic decision to run at below potential output in order to oﬀer increased output
in the balancing market, a common strategy for flexible generation but increasingly seen as a
potentially valuable option for VRE (Nelson et al., 2018).
       The challenge facing liberalized electricity markets is to adapt pricing, dispatch and even
access rules to address these two characteristics. Liberalized markets in Europe have adopted
market designs that were able to cope reasonably well with the fleet of conventional power stations
for which transmission systems had been designed. Generators face zonal or national markets
that set prices on the fiction of firm access and no internal constraints, leaving it to balancing
markets to ensure final balancing of supply and demand. Zonal prices give clear market signals
that determine which plants are in merit (have avoidable costs below that price) and which would
be unprofitable to run. With firm access rights and eﬃcient markets, if generation cannot export
otherwise profitable power, it will be compensated its lost profit, with replacement and costlier
alternatives paid their variable cost.
       The simplification of ignoring locational constraints and their resulting locational scarcity
prices was arguably defensible with the adequate reserves and robust transmission systems that
European countries inherited at liberalization. Eﬃcient cross-border trade and hence European
market integration was finally resolved with market coupling that allowed the eﬃcient use of inter-
connectors, which, when fully used, would create price diﬀerences across these borders. Countries
with severe internal constraints could (and some did, like Norway and Italy) choose zonal pricing.
Great Britain is actively considering the theoretical attraction of Locational Marginal Pricing
(LMP) or creating internal price zones.4 A few countries (including Great Britain) recognized
the importance of guiding the location of new generation with zonal connection charges, but with
little need for new conventional capacity most countries have uniform and often zero transmission
charges for generation. Indeed, the European Commission has mandated low average generation
  3
      A list of acronyms is located at the end of the text.
  4
      https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/review-of-electricity-market-arrangements



                                                              2
transmission charges to level the cross-border playing field, with the required revenue raised from
charges on load (final consumption).
    Conventional generation provides adequate inertia from the synchronized spinning mass
of turbines that stabilize frequency, which is a system-wide characteristic of interconnected AC
systems. Security of supply is ensured by reserves that can rapidly replace lost power or ramp up
to meet demand surges. The European Target Electricity Model was an energy-only market that
was predicated on investors having suﬃcient confidence in the predictability of future revenue
streams that they would deliver suﬃcient capacity for reserve adequacy. Adequate conventional
generation also provided suﬃcient system services such as inertia and adequate ramp rates. Early
market designs in the UK and the Single Electricity Market (SEM) of the island of Ireland chose a
market design with separate payments for energy and capacity, the latter according to its scarcity
measured by the Loss of Load Probability. If missing markets or policy uncertainty make needed
new investment too risky, capacity auctions could be created to determine the missing money
required to facilitate entry and guide exit (as in GB and the SEM).
    High VRE penetration casts doubt on almost all these features of current European market
designs. VRE resources are very diﬀerently located to existing fossil and nuclear generators for
which transmission was designed. Consequently, they will likely face local transmission con-
straints more frequently than well-sited existing conventional generation. This was dramatically
revealed in China, where the initial spurt of VRE development incentivized by a single support
price naturally encouraged rapid investment in high resource areas distant from load centres,
resulting in very high curtailment rates (16% for wind and 10% for PV in the Northwest in 2018
according to O’Shaughnessy et al., 2020) until transmission was expanded (Zhang et al., 2021)
and better price signals adopted (Song et al., 2021). Texas experienced the same high but then
falling curtailment as transmission was expanded (Bird et al., 2016; Golden and Paulos, 2015).
    VRE lacks inertia and at high penetration in systems lacking AC links to other markets,
threatens system stability (Vázquez Villamor et al., 2020). Inflexible generation, minimum oper-
ating levels and a lack of responsive storage and demand side response can limit VRE penetration
as enough adequately flexible capacity needs to be available to maintain stability (Bistline, 2018;
Denholm et al., 2016, 2018). At some level of instantaneous share VRE will need to be curtailed to
keep adequate spinning turbines synchronized, or replacement synthetic inertia activated (when
available). Finally, and almost universally, most European VRE units pay on metered output
rather than holding financial hedging contracts that pay on delivery. This cuts the link between
balancing and real-time prices and operation that is crucial to address constraints not dealt with
in the fictitious copper-plate day-ahead market. Peng and Poudineh (2019) and Schermeyer et
al. (2018) identify a number of flaws in European market design hampering the eﬃcient use of



                                                3
          Figure 1: Evolution of wind output and curtailment in Scotland, 2010-2021

VRE.
    The high peak:average ratio of VRE output becomes a problem once supply exceeds demand
and VRE needs to be curtailed. Newbery (2021, 2023) demonstrated that marginal curtailment
is typically 3+ times average curtailment, and that in current European market designs entry
decisions are driven at best by average curtailment. However, while the concept of average cur-
tailment is well recognized (Golden and Paulos, 2015; Joos and Staﬀell, 2018; O’Shaughnessy et
al., 2021) the concept of marginal curtailment has been underappreciated, which is surprising
given that many authors draw attention to the rapid rise in curtailment with penetration (e.g.
Fig. 2 in Frew et al., 2021). The marginal contribution of the last MW will be more heavily
curtailed than the average, and so will deliver fewer useful MWh for the same cost. When VRE
curtailment is primarily driven by the problem of maintaining system-wide inertia, then new
VRE entry anywhere on the system risks being excessive. At the system level (i.e. ignoring
any internal transmission constraints) Newbery (2023) showed that the incentive for excess entry
was proportional to either the volume of inertial generation needed for stability, or the mini-
mum reserve requirement to insure against the loss of the largest critical element (generation or
transmission).
    This article addresses the more immediate problem of curtailment caused by the mismatch of


                                               4
transmission and the location of recently entered VRE. Figure 1 shows on-shore wind curtailment
rates in Scotland rising over time, and similar problems have already arisen in other countries
where VRE locates in less connected parts of the system (as noted above, China and Texas in
particular). Novan and Wang (2024, p2) econometrically estimate marginal curtailment rates
for wind and solar PV in California and find that although average curtailment of solar is only
4.3%, marginal curtailment is 9% or roughly twice as large. In the case of wind, while average
curtailment is only 0.4 of 1%, marginal VRE curtailment (mainly solar PV) is 10%. The question
addressed is whether existing or potential market designs and access regimes (i.e. who gets
curtailed and how much) give rise to ineﬃcient VRE entry signals, and if so what changes to
these rules can resolve the problem. Whereas it is diﬃcult to devise simple market price signals
to charge for inertial requirements,5 pricing transmission constraints should be simple and has
already been addressed in markets with nodal and zonal pricing. If the transmission constraint
binds, then prices at each side of the constraint will diﬀer, with the diﬀerence equal to the scarcity
value of the constraint. This article asks whether that is suﬃcient, and, if nodal pricing has been
ruled out, whether there are alternative solutions that can provide eﬃcient VRE investment
signals.


2        The Australian model

Australia has developed an innovative way of overcoming the various obstacles of connecting VRE
and avoiding existing local transmission constraints by creating Renewable Energy Zones (REZs).
These almost inevitably require a dedicated line to the Main Interconnected Transmission System
(MITS) which, like most of the population, is located near the coast, while the best VRE resources
of sun and wind are typically farther inland. This might be a useful model for other countries, and
has some similarities to the GB oﬀ-shore wind regime. The Transmission Owner, TO, acquires
suitable sites where developers would be keen to invest and builds the link to connect the REZ to
the MITS. Entrants then pay an average charge based on the expected final volume of VRE and
so are not dissuaded by bearing the full cost of early entry. However, the REZ export capacity is
limited and above some volume of VRE capacity, supply will exceed the line limit and will have
to be curtailed. The main diﬀerence with the European cases of internal transmission constraints
is that the REZ export limit can, within certain limits, be tailored to the expected capacity of the
REZ. As a stand-alone merchant entity the REZ can more readily adopt access rules that address
    5
        Part of the problem is that the binding reliability constraint can change rapidly from the need for inertia to
the need for other flexibility/reliability services, so the relevant price can switch from zero to a positive, possibly
large, price from moment to moment. Real-time payments for such services would stretch the concept of market
rather than administered pricing.


                                                            5
curtailment more eﬃciently than the type of wholesale market designs prevalent in Europe and
Australia. While storage can (and increasingly does) mitigate curtailment, beyond some level it
is more costly to provide extra storage than the value of curtailed energy saved — batteries suﬀer
rapidly decreasing marginal revenues as successive MWh of storage are called on less and less.


2.1      Renewable Energy Zones in Queensland6

The Australian state of Queensland has been at the forefront of pro-actively creating REZs to
harness the massive renewable resources of wind and sun in that state. Powerlink, the state-
owned transmission service provider, identifies and responds to the choice of suitable locations
for investment in VRE. Powerlink agrees to build a suitable radial link to the grid with one or
more ‘anchor investors’ who are ready to build. While user charges for the MITS are regulated
and paid by end-use consumers, Queensland’s REZ model is one of merchant investment paid
by connecting generators. The REZ connection is optimally sized for expansion well beyond the
initial VRE proponent’s investments, with each user charged only a suitable fraction of the REZ
cost. The commercial attractiveness of VRE under this merchant model depends on the fraction
of (unrewarded) expected curtailment resulting from future entry of wind and solar PV into the
REZ (and later, into the National Electricity Market, the NEM).
       One of the considerable advantages of Queensland is that there is reliable sunshine with
a fairly predictable peak in the daytime, while wind resources are stronger at night and so
complementary with solar. At present, Queensland is a single wholesale price zone within the
NEM, whose five-minute price is determined by the Australian Electricity Market Operator
(AEMO) under a conventional uniform first price auction. The NEM is an energy-only market
allowing free entry of generators (provided they meet the stringent grid codes for generator
performance standards, and do no harm with regards to system strength — remediation typically
being via installing synchronous condensers or inverter tuning). Prices fall below zero when
excess regional supply occurs — typically in solar-rich periods — as inflexible generating units
will bid negative prices to stay at minimum load and avoid costly shut-down and subsequent
restarts. In normal conditions (no constraints on exporting to the grid) the REZ will face the
transmission loss-adjusted AEMO wholesale price. The NEM price within each state is set at
the average nodal price at a hub, with prices at each node based on transmission losses, so prices
will be lower the farther the node is from the hub.
       Australia is contemplating a move to Locational Marginal Pricing (LMP) or nodal pricing,
under which the price at each node is the loss-adjusted marginal cost of delivering an extra
  6
      This section draws extensively on Simshauser and Newbery (2023) that also describes the policy debates over
market design and reform.



                                                        6
MW to that node. If LMP were introduced and also applied to REZs, the price within a REZ
would fall to the avoidable VRE cost (taken as zero) whenever potential output exceeds the
export capacity. The price diﬀerence across the REZ boundary would then be the loss-adjusted
nodal price at the connection point to the MITS. This will generate congestion revenue whose
allocation is relevant for the topic of this article. If REZ output is less than the export capacity
then the REZ price will just be the local loss-adjusted nodal price at the REZ exit point, with
no congestion revenue.
         VRE in a typical Queensland REZ has a peak:average output of about 3:1, so that to achieve
an acceptable average output within the REZ, entry will occur until it is almost inevitable that
output in some hours will exceed export capacity and will be curtailed. The way in which VRE
is then curtailed, and its rights to congestion revenue under LMP, can aﬀect whether entry is
eﬃcient or over-encouraged (which, if desired, should then be an explicit choice). This article
also compares diﬀerent access and pricing regimes as they aﬀect entry incentives into other
constrained VRE export zones.


3        The model

The model is the simplest version to illustrate the problem. The VRE is located in a constrained
subset of the network with no other dispatchable generation or flexible demand.7 For convenience,
this constrained zone will be called a Renewable Energy Zone, REZ, a generic constrained zone
that could be anywhere, defined as one with no internal network constraints connected to the
rest of the interconnected system through a single link. Problems of connecting diﬀerent REZs
through a constrained meshed network are beyond the scope of this model but will clearly be
increasingly important as VRE penetration grows but that will be left for possible future work.
Outside the REZ all market failures are assumed away or internalized, so that external market
prices are eﬃcient and correctly measure social value. There are constant returns to building
VRE, and the annualized unit cost of VRE capacity (including any fixed O&M costs) is 
$/MW/yr. Avoidable costs are assumed zero. The capacity of the export link is , the loss-
adjusted price immediately outside the REZ is assumed constant at  and independent of REZ
output.8
    7
        As such the model is applicable to more isolated regions with few sources of flexibility. Flottmann et al.
(2023), Gilmore et al. (2023), Tigas et al. (2015) and Wang et al. (2021) discuss the options available to absorb
excess VRE generation, but all conclude that beyond some point VRE will need to be curtailed.
    8
        In Simshauser and Newbery (2023) prices vary hourly and can fall to zero if there is excess supply outside
the REZ. If VRE output impacts the NEM price  and consumer demand is inelastic in the short run, then the
fall in price will involve a one-for-one transfer from VRE to consumers, and will net out of total social surplus,
but the fall in the NEM price will have a slight negative eﬀect on merchant profits. Using the regression results


                                                          7
               Figure 2: VRE duration curve for Western Downs, Queensland, 2017

     VRE capacity is   , and potential output at fraction of the year  is   . It is
convenient to order hours of production such that the capacity factor  is decreasing in  as in
figure 2. The curtailment function (  ) =   −  is defined for  such that   ≥ ,
and will be similarly ranked so that ( ) is decreasing in  up to  ∗ (the hour of highest VRE
is also the hour of maximum curtailment) so that

                           (  ) =  (  −  0) (   ∗ ) = 0                           (1)

Periods of zero curtailment are distinguished by   ∗ , with    ∗ curtailed (see figure 3).
Under eﬃcient pricing (e.g. LMP) the REZ internal prices would fall to zero when output is
curtailed, but would be  under current European and NEM market arrangements. As  is
measured in fractions of the year, output will be measured in MWyears of 8,760 MWhs. The
average load factor, ALF, is then :                 Z 1
                                                =           
                                                       0

     In figure 2 the ratio of peak output (ignoring the top 14 of 1% or the top 22 hours to rule out
extremes that vary from year to year) to the average is 3:1, which the linearized duration curve in
                                                     R ∗
figure 3 can replicate. Average curtailment, AC, is ( 0 ( )) , but marginal curtailment,
MC, caused by the entry of 1 MW of extra VRE capacity, is, after setting (   ∗ ) = 0 from

of Gonçalves and Menezes (2022) the impact of the Queensland REZ on market prices is very small — the 5-year
average spot price reduces by about $0.30/MWh/GW (primarily wind, solar PV has an insignficant impact at the
observed, low levels of penetration) and does not aﬀect the optimal choice of VRE to install.




                                                        8
             Figure 3: Geometric illustration of average and marginal curtailment

(1),
                     Z ∗                                      Z ∗
                                                     ∗∗            (  )
                            (  ) = (   )     +                      
                    0                                       0        
                                           Z ∗
                                                
                                     MC =                                                   (2)
                                            0   

The ratio of the marginal curtailment to average curtailment is MC/AC:
                                    Z ∗        Z ∗
                                         
                                                   1                                  (3)
                                     0         0

a number typically above 3 at modest levels of curtailment. Figure 3 illustrates this geometrically
and assumes that, in a modest size REZ, increments of VRE increase each point on the duration
curve proportionately. As such it represents a more realistic simplification than assuming the
curtailment curve is shifted vertically as in Newbery (2021). The VRE duration curve of figure
2 has been linearized to preserve the key feature that the curve is steeper for higher levels of
output than lower (and could, if necessary, have additional linear segments without altering the
argument). The duration curve in figure 3 takes the form

                              =  ( (1 − ) ( (1 − ))   1                      (4)


                                                 9
        The Appendix gives the algebraic derivation of the resulting curtailment function as

                          ( ) =  − 0 −    = 0   ∗ = (1 − 0  )

and derives the AC and MC for this case. Its piece-wise linear form allows a simple geometric
interpretation. In figure 3 the average output is the area under the duration schedule ADF0,
which is the sum of the two triangles AE0 and DEF. By simple geometry their areas are 12   +
1
2  (1−1)(1+) =  (1+). Peak output is  so the peak:average is 1(1+). Thus if  = 2,
the peak:average = 3 as in figure 2. Figure 3 also shows the export capacity  = 0 at C, with
the linear curtailment function AB and total curtailment the triangle ABC. As noted. increasing
VRE scales up each point proportionately both for the duration curve and also the curtailment
function. The figure shows that a 1 MW increase in VRE moves the curtailment function from
AB to GH. Total curtailment is the area ABC = 12 ( − 0 ) ∗ so AC = 12 ( − 0 ) ∗  .
Marginal curtailment of the 1 MW entry is the area GABH,9 MC = 12 (1 + 0  )∗ , so MC/AC
= ( + 0 )( − 0 ). Thus if  = 20 , MC/AC = 3.


3.1       Entry conditions for the REZ

In modelling European curtailment problems, consider a local REZ defined by export constraints
in a region potentially attractive to VRE, and suppose that there are no other flexible generation
or demand resources within the REZ nor any internal network constraints. Suppose hypotheti-
cally (and already a reality in countries like Australia, see Gohdes and Wilson, 2022) that VRE
investment is commercially viable without a long-term contract, so that we can consider subsidy-
free merchant entry. Suppose also that the export constraint, , has been pre-determined and
cannot be relaxed in a reasonable time frame. Finally, and as a first step to be relaxed, that
in common with most European systems, generation pays no charge for grid access, which is
entirely paid for by load (i.e. oﬀ-take from the MITS).
     The annual social value of the REZ is the value of the uncurtailed output (the area CBDF0
                  R ∗
in figure 3,  − 0 ( )), less its cost,   , less the cost of the link,  (which for the
moment is assumed a sunk cost). Consumers and producers (connected to the MITS) experience
no change in price  (assumed constant) and hence no change in surplus. The total social benefit
of the REZ,  , is
                                                 Z ∗
                               ( ) = [ −           (  )] −   −                           (5)
                                                   0
        Eﬃciency requires that the choice is socially optimal. Social value is maximized when (using
   9
       plus the small triangle formed by extending the curtailment line CB and height BH, which in the limit is
vanishingle small.




                                                        10
equation (2))
                                          
                                             = ( − MC) −  = 0                                            (6)
                                          
whose solution is  =  ∗ . The following possible access and pricing arrangements will determine
whether entry signals for new VRE are eﬃcient or not.


3.2       Uniform pricing with pro-rata curtailment
                       R ∗                                       R ∗
After curtailment        0    ( ), total output will be  − 0 (  ). If VRE continues to
receive the market price  but is all uniformly (pro-rata) curtailed (the default in many markets),
then the profit of a marginal entrant facing no transmission charges with capacity  is
                                              Z ∗
                                           1 
                             = [ −            (  )] −                                         (7)
                                            0
                          
                                = ( − AC) −                                                              (8)
                           
The profit is maximized when  = 0 at which point  = 0, the free entry equilibrium. Excess
entry will occur if (8) less (6) is positive, which is the case as

                                                 (MC − AC)  0                                              (9)

The strong conclusion is that market signals for entry are excessive if VRE continues to face
external market prices, pays no transmission charges and is curtailed in proportion to capacity
(i.e. pro-rata). If, as is also common at present, VRE has firm access (guaranteeing compensation
if curtailed) the incentive to excess entry will be even greater.


3.3       Non-firm access and priority dispatch

In the Single Electricity Market (SEM) of the island of Ireland, faced with an growing problem of
curtailment and the diﬃculty of building transmission to resource-rich areas suﬃciently quickly,
Eirgrid (the SEM Transmission Owner) has proposed oﬀering non-firm access to new entrants.10
Existing VRE will be allowed to produce as before but new VRE entrants will be curtailed
in a last-in first-curtailed basis, which is eﬀectively curtailing them according to marginal, not
average, curtailment. This should make the market entry condition (−MC) −  = 0 and so
identical to the social optimum (6). Thus non-firm access rights and priority dispatch should
restore eﬃcient VRE entry signals, at least in the context of the assumptions we have made here
(namely, only VRE generation in the REZ with uniform avoidable costs). Note that this result
applies to VRE entry, and not necessarily to dispatchable capacity, where it may be desirable to
  10
       Eirgrid (2022). The proposal is to move to firm access when the transmission constraint is removed or after
five years, whichever is sooner.


                                                         11
encourage entry of more flexible plant, or plant oﬀering system stability resources, which may
be more valuable behind the export constraint than existing plant. Clearly such plant can be
exempted from the priority dispatch rule as could VRE generators that oﬀer similar flexibility
options.


3.4   Locational marginal pricing

Under LMP, prices in the REZ fall to zero whenever the export constraint binds. In that case
total output,  , revenue, , (ignoring any congestion rent if REZ prices fall to zero), and the
profit  of entrant with capacity , will be
                                  Z ∗
                     =  −       (  )
                               0
                           Z 1                            Z ∗
                                                 ∗
                     =        =  −  =  ( −       )
                            ∗                             0
                         Ã        Z ∗            !
                                             
                     =  ( −                   ) −                                (10)
                                         0

as VRE faces a price of zero during the curtailment period up to  ∗ . The curtailed output
during this period is  ∗ , so the volume that receives a positive price is potential output, 
                              R ∗
less the zero price volume 0  . Again the free entry condition is  = 0 = . Free
entry under LMP will be eﬃcient if (10) = (6), which for the linear curtailment function in the
Appendix is the case. Note that the beneficial incentives under LMP would be lost if incumbents
in constrained regions could successfully claim compensation for the loss of revenue. If so, ∗
will be returned to the VRE and will return them to the original ineﬃcient entry condition (8).


4     The Queensland REZ model

The REZ model developed in the state of Queensland is described above in §2.1 In the most
favourable case, the REZ will be designed with an export capacity that is optimally sized for
the planned final level of VRE. Suppose that exit capacity  can be expanded continuously at
a marginal cost of  per unit of capacity. The social value of the REZ is now
                                                  Z ∗
                     ( ) = [ −                    (  )] −   − 
                                                   0
                                                  Z ∗
                                = [ −                    +  ∗ ] −   − 
                                                   0

The first order conditions for  and  are

                                         
                                            =  ∗ −  = 0                                 (11)
                                         

                                                       12
which is the condition for choosing export capacity, , and
                                            Z ∗
                               
                                    = [ −       ] −  = 0                                          (12)
                                            0

which is the same as the free market entry (10).                 Thus assuming that the REZ is optimally
sized and keeps all congestion revenue as the cost of the link, the free merchant entry condition
supports the eﬃcient equilibrium.


4.1         Current NEM pricing in the REZ

Under current NEM pricing, the price facing VRE would be  regardless of constraints, and some
method of curtailing would be required, with those curtailed receiving zero revenue, but others
receiving . In this case there is no congestion revenue so VRE would need to pay for the exit
transmission at a rate  ∗ where  ∗ is the design (optimal) level of entry and  =  ∗ from
(11). Under pro-rata rationing, merchant profits will now be
                                      Z ∗
                                     1                             
                       = [ −           (  )] −  −  ∗                                     (13)
                                     0                             
                               Ã      Z ∗                            !
                                                          ∗    
                          =  [ −         ] −  +       − ∗                                       (14)
                                       0                         

          If transmission is optimized as at (11) then the solution is  =  ∗ is consistent with the free-
entry solution to (14), which is the same as (12).11 VRE entry into an isolated REZ is eﬃciently
incentivized provided it is charged the eﬃcient transmission fee for the connection to the MITS.
Priority access would be incompatible with charging all entrants the same transmission charge
(and unnecessary).


4.2         Moving to LMP in the NEM

Australia is considering a move to LMP, which would lead to eﬃcient VRE entry signals to an
optimally-sized REZ provided the congestion revenue were retained by the REZ to cover the
cost of the transmission link, or, less elegantly, if VRE were granted Transmission Congestion
Revenue contracts that allowed them to receive congestion rents pro-rata, provide they were also
charged the marginal transmission expansion cost.


5         Conclusions and policy recommendations

The first observation is that most current VRE support policies exacerbate the ineﬃcient dispatch
of VRE. Network charging arrangements frequently fail to provide good locational guidance and,
    11
         As with other claims, this is under the maintained assumptions of the model of an isolated REZ.


                                                           13
if generators are paid a regional price rather than the local price, the access arrangements can
encourage excessive entry into export-constrained zones — and not just for VRE. As many authors
have noted, these design flaws call for immediate reform of either transmission pricing and/or
locational marginal pricing. While the concept of average curtailment is well recognized and even
that curtailment can rise rapidly with increased penetration, the concept of marginal curtailment
has been underappreciated and brings new challenges to market and access design. This article
has developed a simple but robust model to examine these issues for resource rich regions facing a
single transmission constraint for exporting VRE. Even under ideal conditions in which merchant
entry is commercially viable with no long-term contracts distorting dispatch decisions (e.g. by
paying only on metered output) there are problems with most current market designs. Thus
merchant VRE entry incentives are excessive in most liberalized European electricity markets
with country-wide or regional zonal pricing where there are binding intra-zonal constraints, zero
transmission charges and firm access (i.e. the right to compensation if curtailed).
        Modest changes to the access regime for new VRE entrants into an REZ granting them non-
firm access and priority dispatch (last in, first curtailed) mitigate the problem while not disturbing
revenue streams to VRE incumbents, under the assumption that all VRE entrants have the same
(or similarly low) avoidable costs and that entrants cannot incur additional costs to rush entry
to obtain priority dispatch. (Priority dispatch would not necessarily be eﬃcient for dispatchable
generation oﬀering required system services within the constrained zone.) In Queensland’s REZs,
if exit capacity is optimized and VRE pays the marginal exit capacity charge, then entry signals
would be eﬃcient even under current state-wide pricing, at least assuming that all units have
the same (zero) avoidable costs.12 Indeed, priority access would both be unnecessary and give
ineﬃcient signals. If Australia adopted LMP, then if VRE is charged for transmission, eﬃcient
entry signals would require pro-rata allocation of Transmission Congestion Revenue contracts. A
simpler solution would be to remove the transmission charge and allocate all congestion revenue
to the transmission owner.
        The main conclusion is that transmission charging, access regimes and market pricing rules
all interact to determine the eﬃciency of entry signals facing new VRE investors, most impor-
tantly in existing networks with a variety of possible location options. While this article has
shown that LMP requires natural adjustments to the access regime as far as VRE is concerned,
it is not an argument against LMP. On the contrary, the main attraction of LMP is its ability to
give eﬃcient real-time dispatch signals for all forms of generation and load, including technologies
  12
       Merit order eﬀects caused by diﬀerent VRE having diﬀerent avoidable costs could introduce small ineﬃciencies
if all are curtailed equally, but the low average curtailment rate and the low avoidable costs would make this
ineﬃciency very small.




                                                         14
not yet invented. Discussions about the case for LMP (e.g. Ofgem, 2023) note that contracts
for supporting VRE would probably need modification, and this article has shown that a move
to LMP could require revisiting existing charging and access rules.



    Acronyms
    AC: Average curtailment; AEMO: Australian Electricity Market Operator ; LMP: Loca-
tional marginal price; MC: Marginal curtailment; MITS: Main interconnected transmission sys-
tem; NEM: National Electricity Market (of Australia); O&M: Operation and maintenance; REZ:
Renewable Energy Zone; SEM: Single Electricity Market of the island of Ireland; VRE: variable
renewable electricity (i.e. wind and solar PV).




                                                  15
    References
    Bird, L. et al., 2016. Wind and solar energy curtailment: A review of international experi-
ence, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 65,577-586, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2016.06.082
    Bistline, J. (2018). Turn down for what? The economic value of operational flexibility in
electricity markets. IEEE Trans. Power Syst. 1, https://doi.org/10.1109/TPWRS.2018.2856887
    Denholm, P., J. Novacheck, J. Jorgenson & M. O’Connell, 2016. Impact of flexibility options
on grid economic carrying capacity of solar and wind: three case studies. NREL Techincal Report
NREL/TP-6A20-66854.
    Denholm, P., Brinkman, G., and Mai, T., 2018.           How low can you go?       The impor-
tance of quantifying minimum generation levels for renewable integration. Energy Policy 115,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2018.01.023.
    Eirgrid, 2022. Firm Access Methodology: Proposal, June, SEM22-068a at https://www.semcommittee.com/
22-068-firm-access-methodology-ireland-eirgrid-proposed-methodology
    Flottmann, J., Akimov, A., and Simshauser, P., 2022. Firming merchant renewable genera-
tors in Australia’s National Electricity Market, Economic Analysis and Policy 74 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eap.
    Frew, B., W. Cole, P. Denholm, W. Frazier, N. Vincent & R. Margolis. 2019. Sunny with
a chance of curtailment: operating the US grid with very high levels of solar photovoltaics.
IScience, 21: 436—447
    Frew, B., B. Sergi, P. Denholm, W. Cole, N. Gates, D. Levie & R. Margolis, 2021. The
curtailment paradox in the transition to high solar power systems. Joule, 5:5, 1143-1167 at
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joule.2021.03.021
    Gilmore, J., T. Nelson and T. Nolan, 2023. Firming Technologies to Reach 100% Renewable
Energy Production in Australia’s National Electricity Market (NEM), The Energy Journal, 44(6),
189-209 at https://doi.org/10.5547/01956574.44.6.jgil
    Gohdes, N., P. & C. Wilson, 2022. Renewable entry costs, project finance and the role
of revenue quality in Australia’s National Electricity Market, Energy Economics, 114, 106312,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2022.106312
    Gonçalves, R. and F. Menezes, 2022. Market-Wide Impact of Renewables on Electricity
Prices in Australia, Economic Record, 98 (320), 1—21
    Joos, M. and Staﬀell, I., 2018. Short-term integration costs of variable renewable energy:
Wind curtailment and balancing in Britain and Germany, Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews, 86, 45—65.
    Nelson, J., Kasina, S., Stevens, J., Moore, J., Olson, A., Morjaria, M., Smolenski, J., Aponte,
J., 2018. Investigating the economic value of flexible solar power plant operation. Energy and
Environmental Economics, Inc.


                                               16
    Newbery, D. 2021. National Energy and Climate Plans for the island of Ireland: wind curtail-
ment, interconnectors and storage, Energy Policy 158, 112513, 1-11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2021.11251
    Newbery, D., 2023. High wind and PV penetration: marginal curtailment and market failure
under “subsidy-free” entry, Energy Economics, 126 (107011), 1-11, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2023.10
    Novan, K. and Y. Wang, 2024. Estimates of the marginal curtailment rates for solar and wind
generation. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeem.2024.10
    Ofgem, 2023. Assessment of locational wholesale pricing for Great Britain, at https://www.ofgem.gov.uk/p
locational-wholesale-pricing-great-britain
    O’Shaughnessy, E., Cruce, J. and Xu, K., 2021. Rethinking solar PV contracts in a world of
increasing curtailment risk, Energy Economics, 98. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2021.105264
    Peng, D., Poudineh, R., 2019. Electricity market design under increasing renewables pene-
tration: Misalignments observed in the European Union. Util. Policy 61, 1—13. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jup
    Schermeyer, H., C. Vergara & W. Fichtner, 2018. Renewable energy curtailment: A case
study on today’s and tomorrow’s congestion management, Energy Policy, 112, 427-436. https://doi.org/10.1016/
    Simshauser, P. and D. Newbery, 2023. Non-firm vs Priority Access: on the Long-run Average
and Marginal Cost of Renewables in Australia, EPRG WP 2322, at https://www.eprg.group.cam.ac.uk/eprg-
working-paper-2322/
    Song, J. et al., 2018. System design and policy suggestion for reducing electricity curtailment
in renewable power systems for remote islands, Applied Energy, 225, 195-208. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenerg
    Song, Y., J. Liu, Y. Wei, M. Zhang, 2021. Empirical evidence from 30 provinces in China,
Renewable Energy 170, 749-763, at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2021.02.044
    Tigas, K. et al., 2015. Wide scale penetration of renewable electricity in the Greek energy
system in view of the European decarbonization targets for 2050, Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews, 42, 158-169. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2014.10.007
    Vázquez Villamor, L., V. Avagyan & H. Chalmers, 2020. Opportunities for reducing curtail-
ment of wind energy in the future electricity systems: Insights from modelling analysis of Great
Britain, Energy, 195, 116777, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2019.116777
    Wang, S., B. Tarroja, L. Smith Schell & S. Samuelsen, 2021. Determining cost-optimal ap-
proaches for managing excess renewable electricity in decarbonized electricity systems, Renewable
Energy, 178, 1187-1197. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2021.06.093
    Zhang, X et al., 2021. What is driving the remarkable decline of wind and solar power
curtailment in China? Evidence from China and four typical provinces, Renewable Energy, 174,
31-42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2021.04.043




                                               17
Appendix A Linearizing curtailment functions
    The general symmetric VRE duration schedule in figure 2 is

                                 =  ((1 − ) (1 − ))   1

The ratio of peak to average output is 1 + . Figure 2 also shows the export capacity  = 0
at C, with the linear curtailment function AB and total curtailment the triangle ABC. The

curtailment function is

                      ( ) =   −  =  (1 − ) −   ≤  ∗ 
                               0 =  (1 − ∗ ) =  if  ∗  1(1 + )
                                ∗ = (1 − 0  ) ∗  = 0 ( 2 )
                      ( ) =  ( ∗ − ) =  − 0 −    ≤  ∗ 

Average curtailment is
                                       Z ∗
                                                                 ∗ 2 ( − 0 )2
                          AC =                ( ∗ − ) =         ( ) =         
                                       0                         2        2 2
Marginal curtailment is
                          Z ∗                Z ∗ µ                     ¶
                                                         ∗
                                        =                 + ∗                
                           0                  0         
                                      Z ∗ µ                      ¶
                                                             1 0
                                        =   ( ∗ − ) +         
                                       0                     2
                                       ∗ 2 0 ∗  2 − 02
                                 MC =   ( ) +  =                
                                      2                  2 2
The ratio of MC/AC is

                                                               2 − 02
                                        MC/AC =                         
                                                             ( − 0 )2
                                                              + 0
                                                       =             
                                                              − 0
as in the second case above.
    In addition
                                       Z ∗                  Z ∗
                                   1
                                                =               (1 − )
                                       0                     0
                                                                  1
                                                       =  ∗ (1 −  ∗ )
                                                                  2
                                                                + 0
                                                       = ∗ (         )
                                                                2


                                                        18
